README.md, before:

# AI Focused Case Study of Well Dot, Inc.

## Overview and Origin

Well Dot, Inc. - [www.well.co](https://www.well.co)

Well Dot, Inc. "Well", based in Chapel Hill, NC, was founded in January 2019 by Gary Loveman, former CEO of Caesars Entertainment Corp., and David Werry, who had a background in healthcare investment [^1] The idea for the company culminated from Loveman's experience in  developing analytics within the gambling industry that was used to influence customer behavior. [^2] According to one of Well's blog entries, Loveman was interested in the fact that his hospitality employees were adept at identifying actions that steered customers towards outcomes favorable to the company yet could not use the skill very well when applying it towards improving their own health. He became focused on coming up with and testing techniques such as providing on-site clinics that would encourage his employees to actively participate in actions beneficial to their healthcare.[^3]

Loveman further explored the idea in later ventures including as Executive Vice President of Aetna. While in that position, he recruited David Werry who worked together with him *to help individuals understand their health potential and take actions toward achieving it.* [^4] Aetna was eventually purchased by CVS, prompting Loveman and Werry to part ways from their employer and form their own company which would focus on technology that incentivized consumers to take care of their health needs.

In 2019 the newly formed company, Well, received $25 million seed funding from investors including from General Catalyst, John Doerr, Mosaic Health Solutions and Hellman & Friedman partners. [^4] They entered in agreement with North Carolina to build their headquarters in Chapel Hill, Orange County and create 400 jobs in return for $3.9 million in tax rebates so long as hiring and investment targets are met across a 12 year period. [^5] A year later in 2020, Well raised nearly $40 million in Series A (e.g. funding after initial seed money used for development and growth) type funding in form of debt (e.g. loans) and equity (e.g shareholder offerings). [^4] As of 2023, their latest funding for Series B occurred in 2022 raising $70 million to be used in additional expansion and technological advancement. [^6] Their continued success in achieving investor funding suggests the company is on track towards future profitability.  

## Business Activities

Well wants to retool the healthcare industry from today's reactive, medical-condition or illness-focused approach towards a consumer first approach that incentivizing sustainable and holistic well-being across a lifetime. Well describes their objective as follows [^6]:

> Our purpose is to improve health through compelling, frequent engagement. We work with users to build a relationship based on their individual health history, challenges and desires. With our AI Health Engine, clinically-driven content, and Well Guides, we offer a persistent presence in their lives that moves them step-by-step towards their own own \[sic\]  goals and overall health improvement. Ours is a high-touch, but low-pressure habit-forming approach that uses proven consumer engagement tactics and incentives to make members successful in advancing their health.

Ultimately, the company seeks to be a companion tool for a broad range of users across demographics and healthcare needs. In 2022, they reached 1000 members via obtaining corporate clients that provide the tool as an optional health care benefit to their employees as well as cultivating partnerships with community health organizations and directly-to-user consumer brands. [^6] Conspicuosly, Well has not prominently named any of their corporate clients or partnerships so far which does not inspire confidence in the company. 

Given that health in its various states is part of the human condition, the potential customer base for a healthcare engagement tool is significant though the problem Well intends to solve (e.g. reactive rather than ongoing proactive healthcare) is an American one; a side-effect of the healthcare industrial complex. The company's website mentions that there is a thriving marketplace attemping to address consumer experiences for more than 100 million people.[^6] Well operates outside of that marketplace however, given the nature of their tool, there are other factors that narrow the potential customer base. 

The scope is limited to:

- American healtcare only;
- technology saavy users; 
- users that can afford the app and corresponding expenses (e.g. internet service, smartphone or machine, data plan, electricity, etc.); 
- users that can afford to spend time on the tool;
- users healthy enough to maintain ongoing engagement with the app;

The tool may provide resources and guidelines for wellbeing however it does not address a key issue that would remain a roadblock towards attaining their vision \- affordability. This is an unsurmountable roadblock for many Americans even if they were powerusers of the application.

Well's offering is geared towards changing the American marketplace rather than competing within it's context. Being first gives them a window to attract a signifcant amount of customers and promote their vision without combatting competition. Well's leadership is adept at obtaining funding which may not be possible for much smaller less networked entrepeneurs and startups. They may be able to remain strongly competitive even if heavyweight corporations with a deep well of money enter the marketplace if they can continue on a path of rapid customer adoption and tool development.

The company's tool is powered by a proprietary algorithm that uses "clinical interventions and guided experiences data" to provides tailored healthcare support to their members. [^6] Based on their job roles qualification requirements for Software Engineers, Data Engineers and Senior Data Scientist [^7] that mention Python, Haskell programming language; data processing pipelines, and modern cloud platforms, their AI uses large language modeling, unsupervised learning, and deep learning.

## Landscape

The healthcare industry is experiencing major tranformative innovation across many areas due to its mutualistic relationship with technological advancements such as AI, 3D printing, gene editing and virtual reality. [^8] While Well promotes lofty goals with its vision of change in the American healthcare approach; Well's tool could be categorized under telehealth and is closest aligned with virtual assistant technology given the caveat that Well's application focuses on lifelong preventative measures and incentivization.

Recent major trends related to virtual assistance in healthcare are:

- Chatbot technology is being used to interact and provide more accurate medical information to patients thereby broadening health care access for patients that may not otherwise be reachable due to location, medical illness, cost, or other factors. [^9]

- Continual advancement in AI natural language processing, data processing, and machine learning is prompting rapid improvement in information provided to patients and fuels the chatbot technology. It has improved communication and information discernment among healthcare practitioners for a more holistic big picture approach to care. [^9]

Although unique in scope, Well's application shares commonalities and overlap with tools from other companies in the field working on a similar vein of virtual assistance technology. [Babylon Health](https://www.babylonhealth.com/en-us) is an early contender in evangelizing proactive healthcare.


**LEFT OFF HERE**
**LEFT OFF HERE**


[Buoy Health: Check Symptoms & Find the Right Care](https://www.buoyhealth.com/)
[AI-powered, Physician-led Virtual Healthcare | eMed UK (babylonhealth.com)](https://www.babylonhealth.com/en-us)
[K Health: 24/7 Access to High-Quality Medicine](https://khealth.com/)
[About Us (curaihealth.com)](https://www.curaihealth.com/about)
[MFine: Consult Doctor Online | Book Lab Tests at Home](https://www.mfine.co/)
[Notable | Intelligent Automation for Healthcare (notablehealth.com)](https://www.notablehealth.com/)



## Results

* What has been the business impact of this company so far?

new, not much impact. at starting and expansion point. good funding

* What are some of the core metrics that companies in this field use to measure success? How is your company performing based on these metrics?

amount of members, multi-channels across more types of customers than competitors

* How is your company performing relative to competitors in the same field?

unclear yet

## Recommendations

Propriety AI limits the company's vision. Truly visionary re-imagining would be open AI algorithms for betterment of healthcare beyond typical corporate goal of profit above all else. 


 - explore AI tools that cater to special needs or elderly (a consequential population that will continue to explode in size world wide.)
 - 
 - remote patient monitoring
 - 
 - get ahead of HIPPAA


* If you were to advise the company, what products or services would you suggest they offer? (This could be something that a competitor offers, or use your imagination!)
* 
 Simple interface, manageable to all given elder population, life-partner 
life event prompts - user communicates major life event that occurred or may occur (child birth, cancer) gives trustworthy resources.

Compatibility across current and outdate platforms to pull records and provide opt-in options to the consumer while protecting privacy and not violating HIPAA. A log of sorts that provides trends and recommendations on demand. Fail-safe flagging when recommending. Easier to obtain informed second opinion. Use AI to remove bias.

* Why do you think that offering this product or service would benefit the company?

I'm concerned Well's multi-vertical approach creates a reproducable jack-of-all trades and master of none effect that would make differentiation challenging when the market grows crowded with competitors. Currently leader by default as there is no current competition with similar offerings, I don't see what would differentiate them from future competitors outsie of being first. Algorithms, even propriety private ones, are likely possible to reverse-engineered given AI and rapidly developing technology.

cheaper resources and technology. Particularly since algorithyms currently cannot be trademarked. Smaller competitors will rise that do not require significant scale to be competitive given the tools can be smart. Establish an ecosystem in where customers would prefer to remain within and community tools and connection

* What technologies would this additional product or service utilize?
AI to connect mental health and community and to protect the vulnerable. hybridization of practioner and AI empowered healthcare. 

* Why are these technologies appropriate for your solution?


## Footnotes

[^1] [Well’s Health Platform Gives You Control In Tackling Health Goals – GrepBeat](https://grepbeat.com/2020/05/19/wells-health-platform-gives-you-control-in-tackling-health-goals/)

[^2] [Gary Loveman - Well](https://www.well.co/team-member/gary-loveman)

[^3] [Well Brings Proven Consumer Tactics to Individual Health Engagement - Well](https://www.well.co/blogs/well-brings-proven-consumer-tactics-to-individual-health-engagement)

[^4] [$40M raises for Well Dot and Elation Health, plus more digital health funding news | MobiHealthNews](https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/40m-raises-well-dot-and-elation-health-plus-more-digital-health-funding-news)

[^5] [Healthcare IT firm Well Dot picks Chapel Hill for its $3.1M headquarters, adding 400 jobs | WRAL TechWire](https://wraltechwire.com/2019/11/19/healthcare-it-firm-picks-chapel-hill-for-its-3-1m-headquarters-adding-400-jobs/)

[^6] [Well Raises $70M in Series B Funding to Grow Digital Health Improvement Platform - Well](https://www.well.co/news/wellseriesbannouncement)

[^7] https://boards.greenhouse.io/well

[^8] [5 innovations that are revolutionizing global healthcare | World Economic Forum (weforum.org)](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/02/health-future-innovation-technology/)
[^9] [Sustainability | Free Full-Text | A Review on Innovation in Healthcare Sector (Telehealth) through Artificial Intelligence (mdpi.com)](https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/8/6655)

Commit message:

updated read me to include an image

README.md, after:

# AI-focused Case Study of Well Dot, Inc.

## Overview and Origin

Well Dot, Inc. - [www.well.co](https://www.well.co)

Well Dot, Inc. "Well", based in Chapel Hill, NC, was founded in January 2019 by Gary Loveman, former CEO of Caesars Entertainment Corp., and David Werry, who had a background in healthcare investment [^1] The idea for the company culminated from Loveman's experience in  developing analytics within the gambling industry that was used to influence customer behavior. [^2] According to one of Well's blog entries, Loveman was interested in the fact that his hospitality employees were adept at identifying actions that steered customers towards outcomes favorable to the company yet could not use the skill very well when applying it towards improving their own health. He became focused on coming up with and testing techniques such as providing on-site clinics that would encourage his employees to actively participate in actions beneficial to their healthcare.[^3]

Loveman further explored the idea in later ventures including as Executive Vice President of Aetna. While in that position, he recruited David Werry who worked together with him *to help individuals understand their health potential and take actions toward achieving it.* [^4] Aetna was eventually purchased by CVS, prompting Loveman and Werry to part ways from their employer and form their own company which would focus on technology that incentivized consumers to take care of their health needs.

In 2019 the newly formed company, Well, received $25 million seed funding from investors including from General Catalyst, John Doerr, Mosaic Health Solutions and Hellman & Friedman partners. [^4] They entered in agreement with North Carolina to build their headquarters in Chapel Hill, Orange County and create 400 jobs in return for $3.9 million in tax rebates so long as hiring and investment targets are met across a 12 year period. [^5] A year later in 2020, Well raised nearly $40 million in Series A (e.g. funding after initial seed money used for development and growth) type funding in form of debt (e.g. loans) and equity (e.g shareholder offerings). [^4] As of 2023, their latest funding for Series B occurred in 2022 raising $70 million to be used in additional expansion and technological advancement. [^6] Their continued success in achieving investor funding suggests the company is on track towards future profitability.  

## Business Activities

Well wants to retool the healthcare industry from today's reactive, medical-condition or illness-focused approach towards a consumer first approach that incentivizing sustainable and holistic well-being across a lifetime. Well describes their objective as follows [^6]:

> Our purpose is to improve health through compelling, frequent engagement. We work with users to build a relationship based on their individual health history, challenges and desires. With our AI Health Engine, clinically-driven content, and Well Guides, we offer a persistent presence in their lives that moves them step-by-step towards their own own \[sic\]  goals and overall health improvement. Ours is a high-touch, but low-pressure habit-forming approach that uses proven consumer engagement tactics and incentives to make members successful in advancing their health.

Ultimately, the company seeks to be a companion tool for a broad range of users across demographics and healthcare needs. In 2022, they reached 1000 members via obtaining corporate clients that provide the tool as an optional health care benefit to their employees as well as cultivating partnerships with community health organizations and directly-to-user consumer brands. [^6] Conspicuosly, Well has not prominently named any of their corporate clients or partnerships so far which does not inspire confidence in the company. 

Given that health in its various states is part of the human condition, the potential customer base for a healthcare engagement tool is significant though the problem Well intends to solve (e.g. reactive rather than ongoing proactive healthcare) is an American one; a side-effect of the healthcare industrial complex. The company's website mentions that there is a thriving marketplace attemping to address consumer experiences for more than 100 million people.[^6] Well operates outside of that marketplace however, given the nature of their tool, there are other factors that narrow the potential customer base. 

The scope is limited to:

- American healtcare only;
- technology saavy users; 
- users that can afford the app and corresponding expenses (e.g. internet service, smartphone or machine, data plan, electricity, etc.); 
- users that can afford to spend time on the tool;
- users healthy enough to maintain ongoing engagement with the app;

The tool may provide resources and guidelines for wellbeing however it does not address a key issue that would remain a roadblock towards attaining their vision \- affordability. This is an unsurmountable roadblock for many Americans even if they were powerusers of the application.

Well's offering is geared towards changing the American marketplace rather than competing within it's context. Being first gives them a window to attract a signifcant amount of customers and promote their vision without combatting competition. Well's leadership is adept at obtaining funding which may not be possible for much smaller less networked entrepeneurs and startups. They may be able to remain strongly competitive even if heavyweight corporations with a deep well of money enter the marketplace if they can continue on a path of rapid customer adoption and tool development.

The company's tool is powered by a proprietary algorithm that uses "clinical interventions and guided experiences data" to provides tailored healthcare support to their members. [^6] Based on their job roles qualification requirements for Software Engineers, Data Engineers and Senior Data Scientist [^7] that mention Python, Haskell programming language; data processing pipelines, and modern cloud platforms, their AI uses large language modeling, unsupervised learning, and deep learning.

## Landscape

The healthcare industry is experiencing major tranformative innovation across many areas due to its mutualistic relationship with technological advancements such as AI, 3D printing, gene editing and virtual reality. [^8] While Well promotes lofty goals with its vision of change in the American healthcare approach; Well's tool could be categorized under telehealth and is closest aligned with virtual assistant technology given the caveat that Well's application focuses on lifelong preventative measures and incentivization.

Recent major trends related to virtual assistance in healthcare are:

- Chatbot technology being used to interact and provide more accurate medical information to patients thereby broadening health care access for patients that may not otherwise be reachable due to location, medical illness, cost, or other factors. [^9]

![image source: [10 chatbot trends that will transform your business in 2023 | Engati](https://www.engati.com/blog/chatbot-industry-trends)](https://assets-global.website-files.com/5ef788f07804fb7d78a4127a/6082dfbc48e16b2492049ca2_wodvXP1qcbqUWQEn2jYThXFzKeWlf9NCZoVN81IK2RE4b-hdpdIOyDZFNOzvUPlvx_xEveCgMIGungaKo-0nv6WN7Ts_Dgi59XdxkvduM_wo78D6q05Bm_8XFjm8MWrFkMbV9L4O.png)

- Continual advancement in AI natural language processing, data processing, and machine learning is prompting rapid improvement in information provided to patients and fuels the chatbot technology. It has improved communication and information discernment among healthcare practitioners for a more holistic big picture approach to care. [^9]

Although unique in scope, Well's application shares commonalities and overlap with tools from other companies in the field working on a similar vein of virtual assistance technology. [Babylon Health](https://www.babylonhealth.com/en-us) is an early contender in evangelizing proactive healthcare.


**LEFT OFF HERE**
**LEFT OFF HERE**


[Buoy Health: Check Symptoms & Find the Right Care](https://www.buoyhealth.com/)
[AI-powered, Physician-led Virtual Healthcare | eMed UK (babylonhealth.com)](https://www.babylonhealth.com/en-us)
[K Health: 24/7 Access to High-Quality Medicine](https://khealth.com/)
[About Us (curaihealth.com)](https://www.curaihealth.com/about)
[MFine: Consult Doctor Online | Book Lab Tests at Home](https://www.mfine.co/)
[Notable | Intelligent Automation for Healthcare (notablehealth.com)](https://www.notablehealth.com/)



## Results

* What has been the business impact of this company so far?

new, not much impact. at starting and expansion point. good funding

* What are some of the core metrics that companies in this field use to measure success? How is your company performing based on these metrics?

amount of members, multi-channels across more types of customers than competitors

* How is your company performing relative to competitors in the same field?

unclear yet

## Recommendations

Propriety AI limits the company's vision. Truly visionary re-imagining would be open AI algorithms for betterment of healthcare beyond typical corporate goal of profit above all else. 


 - explore AI tools that cater to special needs or elderly (a consequential population that will continue to explode in size world wide.)
 - 
 - remote patient monitoring
 - 
 - get ahead of HIPPAA


* If you were to advise the company, what products or services would you suggest they offer? (This could be something that a competitor offers, or use your imagination!)
* 
 Simple interface, manageable to all given elder population, life-partner 
life event prompts - user communicates major life event that occurred or may occur (child birth, cancer) gives trustworthy resources.

Compatibility across current and outdate platforms to pull records and provide opt-in options to the consumer while protecting privacy and not violating HIPAA. A log of sorts that provides trends and recommendations on demand. Fail-safe flagging when recommending. Easier to obtain informed second opinion. Use AI to remove bias.

* Why do you think that offering this product or service would benefit the company?

I'm concerned Well's multi-vertical approach creates a reproducable jack-of-all trades and master of none effect that would make differentiation challenging when the market grows crowded with competitors. Currently leader by default as there is no current competition with similar offerings, I don't see what would differentiate them from future competitors outsie of being first. Algorithms, even propriety private ones, are likely possible to reverse-engineered given AI and rapidly developing technology.

cheaper resources and technology. Particularly since algorithyms currently cannot be trademarked. Smaller competitors will rise that do not require significant scale to be competitive given the tools can be smart. Establish an ecosystem in where customers would prefer to remain within and community tools and connection

* What technologies would this additional product or service utilize?
AI to connect mental health and community and to protect the vulnerable. hybridization of practioner and AI empowered healthcare. 

* Why are these technologies appropriate for your solution?


## Footnotes

[^1] [Well’s Health Platform Gives You Control In Tackling Health Goals – GrepBeat](https://grepbeat.com/2020/05/19/wells-health-platform-gives-you-control-in-tackling-health-goals/)

[^2] [Gary Loveman - Well](https://www.well.co/team-member/gary-loveman)

[^3] [Well Brings Proven Consumer Tactics to Individual Health Engagement - Well](https://www.well.co/blogs/well-brings-proven-consumer-tactics-to-individual-health-engagement)

[^4] [$40M raises for Well Dot and Elation Health, plus more digital health funding news | MobiHealthNews](https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/40m-raises-well-dot-and-elation-health-plus-more-digital-health-funding-news)

[^5] [Healthcare IT firm Well Dot picks Chapel Hill for its $3.1M headquarters, adding 400 jobs | WRAL TechWire](https://wraltechwire.com/2019/11/19/healthcare-it-firm-picks-chapel-hill-for-its-3-1m-headquarters-adding-400-jobs/)

[^6] [Well Raises $70M in Series B Funding to Grow Digital Health Improvement Platform - Well](https://www.well.co/news/wellseriesbannouncement)

[^7] https://boards.greenhouse.io/well

[^8] [5 innovations that are revolutionizing global healthcare | World Economic Forum (weforum.org)](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/02/health-future-innovation-technology/)
[^9] [Sustainability | Free Full-Text | A Review on Innovation in Healthcare Sector (Telehealth) through Artificial Intelligence (mdpi.com)](https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/8/6655)
